have to stop you there I will come back
to you the press conference is getting
underway it will take you there now good
afternoon welcome back to Downing Street
for the government's daily press
conference on coronavirus today I'm
joined by Lynn Owens director-general of
the National Crime Agency and by Stephen
powers national medical director of NHS
England the government's step by step
plan has always been to slow the spread
of this disease increasing the capacity
of our world-class hospitals so that
they can cope and your hard work has
helped us to do this our instruction
remains clear people should stay at home
protect the NHS and save lives through
our ongoing monitoring and testing
programme as of 9 a.m. today I can
report this 640,000 792 tests of
coronavirus have now be carried out in
the UK including 20 8760 tests yesterday
one hundred and forty eight thousand
three hundred and seventy seven people
have tested positive that's an increase
of four thousand nine hundred and
thirteen cases since yesterday
sixteen thousand four hundred and eleven
people are currently in hospital with
coronavirus in the UK down from 17
thousand and forty nine yesterday and
sadly of those in hospital with the
virus 20 thousand three hundred and
nineteen have died that's an increase of
eight hundred and thirteen fatalities
since yesterday as the deaths caused by
this terrible virus pass another tragic
and terrible milestone the entire nation
is grieving my deepest sympathies and
condolences go to those who have lost
loved ones and I would like to pay
tribute to the selfless frontline
workers who have been struck down by
this virus their exceptional public
service and sacrifice will not be
forgotten the last time I was here I
spoke about
the impact of this national emergency on
crime and the tough but necessary
measures to tackle it I announced
enhance support for victims of domestic
abuse many of whom are particularly
vulnerable and exposed our you are not
alone campaign to signpost the help
available and to make it clear to
victims that they can still leave home
has made an incredible impact with 98
million online impressions now I refuse
to ignore the amplifying risk for the
victims of hidden crime an i along with
lynn and across our entire law
enforcement agencies refused to allow
criminals to take advantage of these
unprecedented times now provisional data
from police shows a fall in overall
crime during this coronavirus outbreak
car crime burglary and shoplifting are
all lower than the same period from this
time last year but we also know that the
most sophisticated criminals continue to
exploit and capitalize on this
horrendous crisis so today I have a
message for them our world-class law
enforcement is also adapting and they
are on to you and their efforts are
paying off last week border force found
1 million pounds worth of cocaine set to
be smuggled into the United Kingdom
through the Channel Tunnel hidden in
boxes of face masks the National Crime
Agency has taken down multiple websites
running phishing scams and selling bogus
PPE
last week they arrested two people
suspected of trying to sell unregistered
coronavirus testing kits the NCA have
alerted the police our 1,300 potential
child sexual abuse cases they have made
arrests and safeguarded children this is
a sickening reminder of the frightened
activity that is targeted towards our
children every single day international
action to crush criminal gangs and to
shut drug supply lines continues and the
National Crime Agency helped to seize
700k
grams of heroin in Pakistan potentially
bound for the United Kingdom reported
losses for coke coronavirus fraud now
stands at 2.4 million pounds and I would
like to thank the major banks and UK
finance who are working with us to
protect vulnerable people from becoming
victims of crime and our outstanding
frontline police officers and their
staff continue to do an exceptional job
in keeping our streets safe they are
still responding to all types of crime
that includes some extraordinary
dangerous driving with a minority of
drivers using quieter roads as their own
personal racetrack and endangering
people's lives we've seen speeds of up
to 151 miles per hour clocked on the m1
and 134 miles per hour in a 40 mile per
hour zone in London police and fire
continue to put their arms around people
and our communities by taking people
shop in and taking prescriptions to the
elderly driving ambulances and
supporting those in need throughout this
difficult time I'm immensely grateful to
each and every one of our emergency
service heroes and I would also like to
take this particular opportunity to pay
tribute to the South Yorkshire Police
motorcyclists tragically killed as he
responded to an emergency earlier this
week my thoughts and prayers are with
his family friends and colleagues at
this truly heartbreaking time his death
shows how our exceptional police put
their own lives at risk every day to
protect the people that they serve
coronavirus merely highlights the extent
of their courage their compassion and
their commitment police officers and
staff continue to put themselves at risk
to ensure that people follow the
life-saving instruction to stay at home
now staying at home for almost five
weeks has changed the way in which we
are living our lives and I know how
tough this has been huge sacrifices have
been made jobs have been lost
people's futures have been put on hold
weddings have been canceled families
have been able to see one another every
single person across our United Kingdom
has given up a great deal from the
vulnerable the elderly those
self-isolation
alone to the hundreds and thousands of
small and medium-sized businesses to the
children and young people whose
education has been put on hold this
extraordinary national effort has been
quite remarkable and I'm grateful to
everybody for playing their part but we
should not lose sight of the fact that
this country's efforts are working so my
thanks goes to the British people you
have fostered a spirit of national unity
that is helping us to get through this
challenge in time
the action we are collectively taking is
working and your sacrifices are
undoubtedly saving lives we know that
people are frustrated but we are not out
of danger yet it is imperative that
people continue to follow the rules
designed to protect their families their
friends of their loved ones this will
continue to save lives we all want to
return to live in our lives as normally
as possible and of course as soon and as
safely as we can and that is what the
entire government is working towards but
the five tests we have laid out must be
met before we can ease these life-saving
restrictions we must be sure that we can
continue to protect the NHS that there
is a sustained and consistent fall in
the daily rates of death that the data
shows the rate of infection decreases
that the operational challenges are met
and of course that there is no risk of a
second peak of infections until then we
all have a role to play in pulling our
country out of this crisis so I urge you
all to stay strong and embrace that
spirit of national unity by continuing
to follow the advice to stay at home to
protect the NHS and save lives I will
now ask Lynn Owens from the National
Crime Agency to give an operational
update thank you thank you Home
Secretary criminals have adapted to a
new
situation but law enforcement is
adapting just as quickly as the country
pulls together I want to explain what we
are doing to keep you and the nation
safe from serious and organised crime
this is clearly a new environment for
all of us officers across policing are
doing a fantastic job engaging with the
public in explaining and encouraging
people to comply with the government
guidelines to stay home protect the NHS
and to save lives it is proving
effective in the vast majority of cases
but serious and organized criminals are
looking to take advantage of these
unprecedented times it is showing them
for what they really are a moral corrupt
and exploitative we have not yet seen an
increase in any form of serious and
organized crime under kovat but we have
seen offenders continue to take every
opportunity for their own gain I want to
assure you that the National Crime
Agency which is responsible for leading
the UK's fight to cut serious and
organized crime is responding as quickly
as ever to stop them and so are our
police our border force and other UK law
enforcement colleagues I want to thank
all of these officers who are working
tirelessly to protect the public they
are ensuring there is no safe space for
criminals to operate in so let me paint
you a quick picture we are protecting
you from offenders who are trying to
avoid the lockdown rules and carry on
their illegal businesses
we remain unflagging in our work to
recover illegal guns in the last month
the NCAA's work with police forces
across the UK including West Yorkshire
Bedfordshire Thames Valley Greater
Manchester Police and police Scotland
but others too has led to 24 for arms
being recovered working with UK police
forces and the dedicated regional
organised crime units and border force
we continue to prevent the corrosive
harm to communities from the scourge of
drugs in the last month
UK law enforcement officers have seen
is over 360 kilos of Class A drugs as
one example the British Transport Police
have made 70 RS of people suspected of
involvement in so-called county lines
drug dealing in another example working
with the Metropolitan Police we have
seized 20 kilos of cocaine and half a
million pounds and only yesterday
working with border force and the Police
Service of Northern Ireland we seized 36
kilos of cocaine but the supply of
illegal drugs is a transnational
business so too is our law enforcement
response internationally in the last
month the NCA has contributed to the
seizure of in excess of 1.7 tons of
illicit drugs we are working to protect
vulnerable children in the UK and
overseas
the Home Secretary has described some of
the exceptional work we have undertaken
in the past month together with our
partners following an international
investigation
we recently arrested a British man
suspected of possessing indecent images
of children who was attempting to
re-enter the UK from the Philippines we
are working to protect the border we
know that our joint work together with
immigration enforcement is helping our
partners in France to bring people
smugglers to justice an increasing
proportion of attempts to reach the UK
by small-boat are being ported on the
French side with at least 30 people
having been convicted we are protecting
you from those that are preying on your
fears and trying to take your money in
addition to work highlighted by the Home
Secretary we have 86 other instances
where we are working alongside a range
of regulatory bodies and public health
England on fraud we will take swift
action against anyone unlawfully selling
fake kits or PPE for example a man from
West Sussex was recently arrested by
city of London police and charged after
being caught making and salad kovaydin
19 treatment kits to people in the UK
the US and France
online in the last month the national
cybersecurity Center together with
ourselves and the City of London police
have taken down more than two thousand
scams relating to coronavirus including
fake online shops malware distribution
sites and phishing sites seeking
personal information such as passwords
or credit card details
the Home Secretary has highlighted the
collective national effort to tackle
coronavirus but the public can help
fight crime too indeed we have an ask of
you criminals will try and exploit this
national crisis we are not trying to
scare people at a time where many of us
are already anxious but we do want you
to be aware of the simple steps you can
take to protect yourselves and your
loved ones from harm
online firstly protect your children
online we have created a range of
material that will help you to talk to
them however young they are and without
frightening them it includes guidance on
how to identify manipulative behavior
you can find a step-by-step guide I
think you know Cote UK secondly stay
safe online the new cyber aware campaign
sets out six top tips on how to protect
yourself online
these include creating strong passwords
using three random words regularly
updating your devices and turning on
backup more details are on the cyber
aware website thirdly look after your
money fraudsters have targeted members
of the public by phone by text and by
email they have used the current
situation to peddle fake testing kits
and prescription drugs we are asking you
to be vigilant for these scams be even
more cautious than usual if you are
contacted by unknown numbers and don't
open suspicious emails or their
attachments the police and banks will
never ask you to withdraw money or
transfer it to a different account if
you believe you are a victim please
report it to your bank and action fraud
immediately while the Nationals
restrictions are in place and you are
staying home to protect the NHS and
saves lives
we the National Crime Agency together
with our law enforcement partners are
pursuing relentlessly
the most harmful criminals whoever and
wherever they are to keep you safe and
looking ahead we will help ensure that
the country's economic recovery is not
subvert 'add by organized crime we will
continue to protect the public to the
very best of our collective ability
thank you in secretary Thank You Lynn
thanks very much I'm not gonna hand over
the Seva powers the NHS has pulled out
all the stops to manage the surge in
patients with coronavirus and our
wonderful staff of course continue to
work around the clock to do just that
and as a result the NHS has not been
overwhelmed and we have at all times
maintain the capacity needed to provide
patients affected by this terrible virus
with the treatment that they need but
today we are reminding everyone that the
NHS is also there to help if you have a
condition that is not coronavirus it's
particularly important that if you have
symptoms of an illness that might need
urgent attention sudden facial weakness
that might be a stroke chest pain that
might be a heart attack
a sick child who's not improving or
perhaps a pregnant woman whose baby is
moving less than usual you should
contact the NHS go online or call but
online first through 1 1 1 by contacting
your GP first of course or in a real
emergency there's always 999 those
methods of contact in the NHS are still
there for many of these conditions fast
diagnosis and treatment is absolutely
crucial so it's really important not to
delay the NHS is still there for you I
want to go through some data that you
will be very familiar with in a set of
slides that you will
of seen over the recent weeks and to
update you on the current position so
the first slide shows transport use in
the UK and as we've often said we
continue to see reductions in public
transport usage and here we show
transport in London on the tube buses
throughout the country national rail and
Transport for London bus and they are
all at much lower levels than they were
prior to the social distancing measures
being introduced we've seen a reduction
in motor vehicles - but them is maybe a
little bit of concern that that is
starting to rise again ever so slowly
but that's really important that we
think about that and on the next slide
this is a can you slide which takes data
from Apple from Apple maps from people
seeking directions or asking for
directions in Apple maps and sure
similar available will also be available
from Google this is a seven-day rolling
average and once again it shows a
decrease since the locked-down measures
were introduced of requests for walking
driving or instructions on public
transport now of course the Sun is out
around the country the days are getting
longer and I'm sure it's tempting for
people to feel that they should go out
particularly as I'll show you in the
next few slides when we are beginning to
see the benefits of that social
distancing but of course I can't
emphasize enough that we are far from
there yet it's really critical that
people maintain their compliance with
those social distancing instructions it
won't take much for this virus to start
increasing its transmission again and to
spread more widely and it would be
foolish and and and not right if we lost
the benefits that we have gained over
the last four weeks which I know have
been hard for everybody so it's really
important that despite the weather we
stay at home we keep to the guidelines
that we've been issued with and then the
next slide as I've said we are beginning
to see sets of data which shows
benefits of complying with those
instructions so firstly tests this shows
a number of new cases by testing is
reasonably stable and of course we are
expanding test capacity all the time so
we may see some more positive cases
through that expanded testing capability
but this is a fairly stable set of data
now and on the next slide we show people
in hospital with kovat 19:00 and you can
see now we are getting a sustained
reduction in people who are being
treated in our hospitals particularly in
London where you will see a steady
decline but also you will start to see
the beginnings of declines in other
parts of the country as well and then on
the next slide we focus specifically on
those a small number of patients who
unfortunately have to be treated in our
critical care facilities our intensive
treatment units and our high dependency
units and you can see again we are
beginning to see a decline although that
decline will lag the overall number of
admissions in our hospitals now we have
new data here for Northern Ireland and
you can see that in the light blue line
and we put that in to present a truly UK
wide picture but I should just note that
this is new data and it's not currently
comparable with the other lines as it
shows cumulative data rather than daily
and that's why the line looks a little
bit different on this chart and then on
the next slide finally this is the
number of deaths in UK hospital we
report hospital deaths on a daily basis
these are reported death rather than the
day of death and you can see again that
there is a trend towards a decline in
deaths that is a trend that will occur
later than the decline in hospital
admissions and critical care but it's
really critical that if we keep
complying with the social distancing
instructions then we will begin to see a
decline in deaths
thank you very much I'm sorry there's
one more slide sorry
there is one more slide which is the
global deaf flurry home security global
death comparison which again we show and
again this shows UK hospitals only but
also with a lag on it
it also shows debts in UK all settings
so this includes death out of hospital
but if we said on a number of occasions
there is more of a lag in the collection
of that data we are proving that but
there is a lag so that is shown it's a
little bit behind or the hospital only
death reporting sorry thank you very
much as ever I'm going to hand over now
two questions first question is from
Lauren Moss from the BBC Lauren good
afternoon on the 28th of March professor
powers you said we will have done very
well if fewer than 20,000 people died
during this epidemic and we have sadly
passed that number now does this mean
the strategy should have been different
so it's a very sad day for the nation
20,000 deaths is clearly 20,000 deaths
too many and I think we should all
recognize that our heart my heart goes
out so everybody's heart goes out to the
families who have lost a loved one and
the families and friends of those loved
ones when the battery balance and I made
that comment a number of weeks ago what
we were emphasizing was that this is a
new virus a global pandemic our
once-in-a-century global health crisis
and this was going to be a huge
challenge not just for the UK but for
every country and I think unfortunately
we have seen that challenge not just
here but but around the globe and even
in countries that have got on top of
this early on we are unfortunately
beginning to see new infections so I
think the first thing to emphasize is
that this unfortunately is not going to
be something that we will get over in
the next few weeks this is something
that we are going to continue to have to
work our way through over the months
ahead as I've said before this is not a
sprint this will be a marathon in
dealing with this virus and I think the
moving past 20,000 deaths just reminds
everybody
what I was just saying when I introduced
the slides but it is still absolutely
critical absolutely critical that we
continue to follow the social distancing
guide guidelines because we are seeing
the benefit of following those
guidelines and we will only continue to
see the benefit and we will only
continue to see reductions in debt if we
all continue to do that Thank You
Stephan and I just on that point as well
I think look the nation today will be
deeply moved by the figures of the
number of people have died I mean every
death is a tragedy but there is a very
strong message here Stephan has
articulated this and to viewers at home
as well we've made a great deal of
progress but actually we're not out of
the woods yet we really are not and
there is a lot more that we can all do
as responsible individuals in the way in
which we follow these measures and at
the end of the day the message could not
be clearer in terms of protecting the
capacity of the NHS making sure that
people protect themselves who the
measures have been outlined social
distancing hygiene etc etc but I think
right now I think for the nation in
particular this is a deeply tragic and
moving moment all our thoughts and
sympathies are with those individuals
that have lost family members through
this horrendous and absolutely appalling
phone virus was there anything else you
wanted to add at all yes please
with that in mind and with this rising
death toll are there any circumstances
now in which you would be able to
envisage relaxing any of the measures of
the lockdown at all well I think if I
may
Loren on this the government has been
abundantly clear in terms of the things
in fact I outlined that in my remarks
earlier on about the five specific
things that have to be satisfied this
isn't optional at all that they have to
be met those tests have to be met so
that we can judge with the scientific
advice and the advisors as to when we
will consider it to be safe to adjust
the current measures and quite frankly
that is not right now it is clear that
it is not right
and as I've said as Steve nacelles
linner said we've all set here today
unequivocally we need people to continue
the national effort has been
extraordinary it really has I pay
tribute to everybody our lives have
changed in the way in which we function
on a daily basis you know whether it's
from our children our households our
family even the way those of us that are
going into work every day so those five
tests are absolutely vital we have to
meet them before we can make any changes
whatsoever so we are very conscious of
that we have obviously had a really
devastating moment in terms of the
number of people who have died we're
fighting this virus and that is the
national effort that we're all behind
are we're all put in our shoulder to the
wheel to make sure that we fight that
virus so that we can get the right
outcome in the long term which is
combating this and protecting the public
and saving lives Thank You Lauren I'll
now hand over to Paul brand from ITV
Paul good afternoon
very much firstly to the medical
director the twenty thousand figure of
thirds of course two deaths in hospitals
and you've said that there's a downward
trend in that number when do you expect
the peak to come in care homes
specifically and to the Home Secretary
please um doctors and nurses who come to
the UK to work in the health care sector
have to pay a health surcharge of
hundreds even thousands of pounds for
their families given that they too are
fighting this pandemic is now the right
time to scrap that surcharge for them
thank you Paul Stephen yes I think all
along we have we've resisted trying to
predict when Peaks occur because it's
always difficult in advance you can do
that by looking backwards I think the
point about care homes is a really
important point though and we know there
are outbreaks in care homes and we know
that it's really important obviously for
the residents and staff of those care
homes and their loved ones that they are
dealt with swiftly and they are dealt
with correctly so public health England
and others are assisting when outbreaks
occur we're increasing the government is
increasing testing pH year increasing
testing in those care homes which will
be a very important part of getting on
top of infections in
homes and of course the staff in those
care homes again a working
round-the-clock I pay tribute to NHS
staff earlier but I'd also like to pay
tribute to the many staff and carers in
care homes and also caring for people at
home in social care as well because they
are working just as hard to ensure that
we get on top of this virus thanks
Stephen and Paul in response to your
question well first of all everybody
that's working in the NHS in the
frontline who are working night and day
clearly are making just an extraordinary
contribution at this particular time
Paul you'll be aware of many of the
changes that we've already made around
the immigration status the visa status
for NHS workers extending their visas
already if they were coming up for
expiry and we're providing a great deal
of support on that basis are we very
clear we have a range of measures that
are like most things in government under
review and we're looking at everything
including visa surcharge and that is
something that obviously I'm working
with my colleague Matt Hancock in the
Department of Health and Social Care
because that's a joint policy with
Matt's team and we're looking at
everything now in terms of what we can
do to continue to AB seat continue to
support everyone on the frontline in the
NHS we are speaking about the healthcare
professionals the medics of doctors and
nurses the allied health care
professionals who come have come to the
UK and are making an immense
contribution was there another point
that you'd like to raise yeah if I could
please just to just to Stephan Pires
again I appreciate this difficult
sometimes to get the data on the care
sector but many in the care sector it's
happening yes they do feel as if they're
dealing with this crisis blind because
they're not being given a sense of how
the virus is spreading across the sector
is there anything you can tell us about
the way the virus is spreading the
likely impact in the care sector when
you think people might come and how many
people may end up sadly using their
lives in that sector so I think as I
said I know that public health England
are stepping up their support for the
care home sector and I know increasing
testing not just of people in care homes
who are symptomatic but increasingly of
others as well is going to be a really
important
method and way of ensuring that as we
get as quickly as possible on top of
those outbreaks in care homes so so it's
something that as a group of clinicians
within within government within phe and
within the NHS we care very much and
worry very much about care home sector
and we are increasing the support that
goes into managing the virus in in in
care homes in particular poor many
thanks
I'm now going to move on to Lisa Holland
from Sky News Lisa good afternoon hello
good afternoon this is a question for
the Home Secretary we saw there that
motor vehicles are starting to rise and
that you had said that that was a cause
for concern Sky News has spoken to
Professor Susan Michie a member of
Sage's behavioural advisor group who
says that the government is sending out
mixed messages on the one hand telling
people to stay at home and on the other
allowing non-essential work to take
place so what would you say to that and
professor powers what would you say to
people who are starting to understand
that if they've been in complete
lockdown for over a month they've
absolutely played it to the letter
followed all the rules and they have a
loved one who has done exactly the same
why they can't extend their household
into a smaller group if you like rather
than just the people living under the
same roof
well Lisa let me start by ask answer in
your point and question that has been
raised about transport and messages the
government's message has been clear and
consistent from day one about staying at
home obviously to protect the NHS and to
save lives but we've also been clear
about people going to work that if you
can't work from home through social
distancing the measures that are
actually in place in some workplaces now
that you can go to work but I do want to
say something else around this um you
have highlighted in fact Stevens
highlighted as well from the very first
graph that was put on the screen that we
are seeing an increase in the number of
journeys that have been taken and more
people being out and about we understand
the frustration of course we understand
the frustration people have been at home
for
five weeks however if we're going to
combat this virus and to save lives we
want to stop the spread of this virus we
have enforcement measures through
policing those enforcement measures are
being applied they are working and we've
been very very clear about that from a
policing perspective as well and I have
seen and I speak to officers police
officers every single day everyone from
law enforcement chief constables across
the policing family who are have
officers out and about in our
communities are engaging they're
explaining what the guidance is why
people must stay at home why social
distancing matters now and social
distancing will continue to match in the
future we've got no doubt about that
that is what is stopping the spread of
the virus and that is effectively what
we are trying to do so there are no
mixed-messages we have been clear the
police have been clear law enforcement
has been clear I think throughout you
know every single aspect of government
communications and the practices that we
are encouraging and in some quarters
enforcing in society through the police
staying at home and enforcing social
distancing is absolutely vital and that
is the message for viewers today as well
we're seeing that uptick in transport we
say again to the British public we need
you to continue to follow those social
distance in measures and stay at home to
protect lives Stephen so I know
absolutely how difficult it is
particularly for those who want to visit
loved ones extended households extended
relatives but I think it's important to
remember that one of the main ways that
this virus is sprayed and transmitted is
from household to household and so the
very basis of the social distancing
measures that were put in a number of
weeks ago was to interrupt that chain of
spread from household to household and I
think we have seen that that and the
other measures are working we've shown
that in the data we've shown today and
on other days and I think the British
public have done fantastically well to
keep complying with those measures and
to break those transit remains of
transmission but I think we would all be
disappointed if we forfeited those gains
by releasing too early
and by allowing those chains of
transmission from household house Hill
to start to be reestablished because
then we would start going backwards then
the virus would start to transmit and
spread more and those downward curves
that we're seeing would unfortunately
start to rise again so it's too early
yet we need to be confident as in the
five test the government have set that
we are really on top of this virus
before we proceed to the next phase this
was really thinking else do you wanted
to add yeah just to say that you say
there are no mixed-messages but isn't
opening a DIY shop and mixed message
well shops are open we've seen
supermarkets open and they're all
practicing social distancing and that's
they've been doing that incredibly well
I should Adam I think again the British
public have adopted that incredibly well
we've also been clear that if you can
work that you should be able to work and
that is down to employers for in social
distancing measures and practices and
effectively that's what we are asking
the British public to follow those
particular practices and measures they
are restrictive but with that the public
know why they are restrictive as well so
if I may say so I think the government
has been very clear in the stance that
it's taken and in the communications and
messaging I think it's quite remarkable
whether you go to the supermarkets or
even out on a walk in parks the way in
which the public are conducting
themselves is very much in tune with
that social distance in policy and the
advice that has been coming from the
scientists and from medical offices and
from the government and I pay tribute to
the British public for following that
thank you Lisa I'll now go to Nigel
Nelson from the Sunday Mirror Nigel good
afternoon oh it's one for the Home
Secretary the Royal College of Surgeons
has told us that the backlog of council
operations could take five years to
clear is that the timescale that you're
now working on and how many lives do you
estimate that these delays will cost and
one if I may for Steven Powers
when doublet Cummings attended its age
did he ever say anything and if so what
well Nigel let me start I think into
well very much your point and your
comments and reflections from the Royal
College of Surgeons I've ever Department
of Health social care will work with the
NHS with NHS England and advisors in
terms of care elective care surgeries
addressing many of those issues that
you've highlighted and of course of
enormous concern to individuals who are
perhaps potentially waiting for
operations we want to make sure of
course that services resume in the right
and proper way but while this virus is
on obviously within the NHS and perhaps
Stephen could expand upon this too there
are certain ways of working across the
NHS certain prioritizations of cases of
surgery and the treatment of patients
and of course those decisions will be
based on making sure the NHS is
adequately resource has a capacity but
also is able to cope with the virus and
contain the spread of the virus within a
medical facility Stephen yes so we work
very closely with the Royal College of
Surgeons and neither the Royal College
or ourselves in the NHS would want to
see delays of that order of magnitude we
have had to step down elective surgery
in order to focus on ensuring that we
cope with the surge in in patients with
coronavirus but as soon as we possibly
can we do want to step back back up
again I think the chief medical officer
has has on a number of occasions
articulated the consequences of a global
pandemic in terms of deaths and harm to
individuals and populations there are
other deaths that occur directly as a
result of the corona virus we've talked
about that sadly earlier there are the
deaths and the harm that occurs because
the Health Service becomes overwhelmed
and simply can't cope and we haven't
seen that here as I said earlier the NHS
has coped admirably and we've always
maintained the capacity that mean it
hasn't been overwhelmed we can also see
deaths and harm because individuals for
whatever reason
don't access the services that are
actually up and running and that's
exactly why I opened today with a
reminder to everybody that those
emergency service is still there for you
and you mustn't be afraid to come
forward and to access them and certainly
not to delay accessing them if you have
symptoms that might be an emergency and
then finally there's the harm that that
is potentially done because of the
economic consequences are of a pandemic
and it will take many years - to see
exactly what those consequences are in
terms of harm to the population but in
the third of those we we do want to get
those services those elective services
up and running as quickly as we can
we are beginning to focus on that in the
NHS now but clearly we need to make sure
that we are also managing the patients
that we still have with coronavirus on
the question on stage so I've been
participating attending Sage since
towards the end of February and my
experience of Sage is absolutely being
about scientists and experts and there
are scientists scientific experts at
Sage from a variety of disciplines
epidemiologists behavioral scientists
public health officials immunologists
from the wide range of expertise that
you would need to manage this crisis and
and it's a it is a scientific discussion
what I've witnessed and experienced is a
scientific discussion between scientific
advisors robust discussion at time as we
consider the evidence conclude what the
evidence is telling us sometimes point
to where the evidence is missing and
where we need to gain and generate
further evidence and then as is in the
name of the group then to provide advice
to government and government officials
in terms of the scientific basis of the
choices that government quite rightly
has to make as elective representatives
Nigel was there anything else you'd like
to raise at all just whether or not that
doublet Cummings actually made any
contribution at those meetings
well the scientific contributions as
exactly as I said it's the scientists
that made the scientific contributions
and that scientists and the experts
in that group that are absolutely
involved in in generating the advice so
the advice comes from those scientific
experts to government and government
officials that's exactly what sage is
set up to to do and that is exactly what
my experience is of the way sage works
Nigel many thanks I'm now going to hand
over to Brendon Carlin from the Mail on
Sunday Brendon good afternoon afternoon
secretary and you've stressed today
sacrifices made by which is probably you
pay tribute to them one of the bees
sacrifices is is the fact that schools
are closed
do you not sympathize with parents up
and down the country who are having to
juggle between childcare and the need to
get back to work Brendon of course I
think you know as a parent myself and
all parents working from home and
particularly with children who may be
engaging in the home schooling as well
that's taking place this is immensely
difficult and it's an immensely
challenging time I pointed that out in
my opening remarks these are very very
difficult and unusual times I have to
say I think schools that have opens have
been brilliant they've been absolutely
remarkable I pay tribute to many of the
teachers and the head teachers I know
from my own constituency some
outstanding examples of teachers and
teaching people in the teaching
profession they're doing a great deal to
help you know support the children of
key workers but also vulnerable children
right now as well and we should not
forget about them the fact of the matter
is Brendon I've already outlined the
five tests that will have to be met
absolutely before we can look at
restarting schools and I think the key
thing to note that is before we can even
do that those tests have to be made we
want to do this in the right and proper
way we need the scientific and the
medical advice to come together in the
right kind of way and I think both
parents teachers and children would
welcome that on the basis that they want
to know that they're going back to
school at the right time in the right
way with the right kind of support and
that is absolutely what this government
is working towards achieving did you
have another question at all not really
given much when assurance that today in
the general tenor of the press
conference that any active planning is
underway for how we restart the economy
again in relation to schools we know and
I think teaching unions have been making
this clear to ministers that Safety's
paramount about how we can banks can you
give any sort of assurance today that
there is in the active consideration I
mean serious detail consideration when
we come back to schools and just one
question I made two at the beginning of
this process there was much debate about
the time that we entered the lockdown in
terms of making sure that everything was
people would accepted everything if it
appears to be something that may have to
go on and on and on and on what was the
point of delaying the point we entered
it well Brendon first of all let me um
come back to your question we can
absolutely give very clear assurance
that a British public government is
working night and day on looking at its
how we can move us out of this situation
I touched on this in my remarks as well
we understand the difficulties we
understand the frustration but this is
not this is not a binary choice we
cannot move from you know removing
restrictions in terms of just moving
back to how things were
it is right that we consider the advice
and we are doing that where absolute
doing that we're working with our
advisors with sage and others but as you
all know as well and as you're seeing
we're working with others were listening
to others from business from industry as
to how we can move forward but the fact
of the matter is we want to prevent a
second wave of this horrendous virus and
to do that we have to make sure that we
continue with the measures that we put
in place but also to move to any form of
you know changes whether it's schools
whether it's business whether it's
restarting aspects of society we need to
make sure that we have the right kind of
preventative measures in place to stop
another wave of that virus the British
public would look to their government to
make sure that their health their safety
their well-being is absolutely power
along with the health the safety the
well-being of the NHS protecting that
capacity that's something we have been
consistently doing and we continue to
work towards achieving that and I know
you'd love me to give you a date as to
when you know schools may reopen but
we're not going to do that that would be
irresponsible to do that that would set
hopes up the fact of the matter is we
are all as you've heard me say we're
putting our shoulder to the wheel
so we're night and day to look at how we
can do things differently and in the
right way going forward and that's what
this government is committed to do doing
Stephen so timings of lockdowns at
whatever point in a pandemic and timings
of the individual measures in a lockdown
I think are really difficult decisions
and and I talked a little bit earlier
about the harm and deaths that occur
from a pandemic and I said some of those
are relating to the health service and
health services being overwhelmed or
having to to do to stop some activity in
order to to manage the virus and I
talked about the harm that potentially
comes from an economic lockdown and as
and it's the chief medical officer has
said a number of times it's not always
possible to to manage those at the same
direction at the same time so so there
are a set of choices difficult choices
to be made in pandemics and that's why
deciding the timing around lockdown
measures and the combination of lockdown
measures is a is a challenging thing to
have to do Steven Thank You Brendan
thanks very much
I'm good to bring this to a close now
but before I do I want to thank both
Stephen and Lynn as ever for their
valuable insights and contributions but
I do have a final message to send I've
been here with Lynn today who has shown
the stellar work of the National Crime
Agency and I say again to any criminal
seeking to exploit this virus for their
own gain our outstanding police and law
enforcement agencies are absolutely on
to you they are the absolute best of us
all and they continue to work tirelessly
to keep our country safe and then
finally to the British people I want to
thank you and I urge you as ever to back
and to continue to back the
extraordinary national
to beat this virus to stay strong and to
follow the advice the consistent advice
a consistent message we have been given
to stay at home to protect the NHS to
save lives thank you very much see the
headlines as they happen and watch BBC
news live in the app and get the full
story with BBC decoder UK forward slash
news follow the story for all the latest
with BBC News